# INN Technology Strategy for 2015

### In this doc

- [Where We Are Now](#situation)
- [Our Target Audiences](#target)
- [Our Plans for 2015](#proposal)

<a id="situation"></a>
## Where We Are Now

#### Our situation at the beginning of 2015

**Largo** - About two years into the project, [Largo](http://largoproject.org), our WordPress-based platform/framework for news publishers, remains our most successful program. We’re now up to ~120 total sites using Largo, of these about 40 are INN members/projects that we host. We will be releasing another substantial update to the platform in early 2015 and one of our priorities for the new year will be to invest in training and support to both reduce our support workload as the platform continues to grow and to help members maximize their use of the platform. Paid customization, training and support for Largo will also likely be the largest driver of revenue for our consulting program as outlined below.

**Editorial Projects/News Apps** - This year we built our first editorial app (Power Players) to support a collaboration among 14 member organizations. As the board has directed us to no longer play as active a role in facilitating editorial collaborations, in the future we will continue to build editorial apps as one of the paid services we offer to member organizations with the Director of Data Services position presently shared with IRE moving under the technology group and budget starting in 2015.

**Tools** - In 2014 we started building and adapting tools to support members’ editorial and web publishing needs and we expect to continue this work in 2015. Specifically we plan to invest in helping some of our larger members adapt tools they build that we believe may be of wider application to other members. In some cases the only thing keeping these tools from being re-used is some work polishing the code and creating more comprehensive documentation and helping smaller organizations to make use of them.

**Training and Documentation** - To date we have under-invested in training and documentation. This has lead to an under-utilization of the tools we build and a volume of support requests (many just simple questions) that we struggle to manage. For that reason, and also because the member survey and board both point to a need for INN to engage in more training, in 2015 we need to focus more investment in this area, particularly around Largo but also to help increase the overall level of technical ability and, equally important, technology leadership in the network.

**Community Building** - As a networked organization, we are also uniquely suited to make connections between members and provide a support network for technologists working at member organizations. In 2015, we will continue to explore ways to build this community (book club, office hours, newsletters, etc.).

**INN Web Properties** - In 2014 we began a comprehensive revamp of INN’s website, splitting it up into more logical divisions, each with a clearer purpose and target audience. To date we’ve launched Journo.biz and Newstraining.org and we plan to relaunch the main INN site targeted for March 1st 2015.

**Paid Consulting** - Previously we have provided some one-on-one support to member organizations as time and resources have allowed. Only in the last bit of 2014 did we start charging for these services. In 2015 we will increase the amount of paid work we do to offset some of our program costs and diversify our sources of revenue.

**Impaq.Me** - We have been responsible for managing the design and development roadmap, infrastructure and support for Impaq.Me since the project started, often relying on contract help for implementation. In Q1 and Q2 of 2015 we will be focusing on either spinning this project off with a new partner (with INN retaining some equity in the resulting company) and/or open sourcing and sunsetting the existing codebase to enable other interested parties to continue development, setup their instances of the app, run their own campaigns, etc. as they wish.

<a id="target"></a>
## Our Target Audiences

#### Who we serve, how we're funded

To date, we have been primarily focused on building platforms, tools and apps for member organizations and our sole source of funding has been national foundations. However, with the addition of paid consulting services we are also increasingly looking to other related markets and other potential sources of revenue.

### The target audiences for our technology programs are the following in order of importance:

**INN member organizations** - As a team, we exist to support the work of our member organizations, focusing primarily on problems that we are uniquely suited to tackle at a network level. We also recognize that many organizations under-invest in technology at the present time and we want to help close that gap. This means that we will offer training and resources to help less-technical organizations get up to speed, as well as paid assistance at reasonable rates for organizations that need more one-on-one help but are not yet ready/able to hire their own full-time technology resources. We will also help organizations who are a bit further along in identifying and hiring technology staff and collect and share best practices from organizations who have already made investments in technology so that smaller organizations can learn from their experience.

**Non-member non-profit organizations; Non-member for-profit organizations** - Many of the tools we build and the programs we develop for members are applicable to other news organizations. We will continue to release nearly all of our projects open source and make them free for anyone to use but we will subsidize the cost of developing and maintaining some of our projects by charging for help with setup, customization, training and support.

**The broader journalism and tech community** - We also recognize our role as a networked organization to facilitate connections and build community between technologists at member organizations. We also will, from time to time, facilitate partnerships with outside organizations.

### Funding for our programs will come from the following types of revenue sources, in order of importance:

**National Foundations** - To date, with the exception of a small amount of paid work we took on in the last bit of 2014, all of INN’s technology programs have been funded through grants from national foundations. We expect this to continue to be an important source of funding for the foreseeable future and will continue to pursue foundation grants for our programs moving forward while also working to diversify our revenue picture to be less reliant on any single source of funding.

**Paid Services** - In 2015 we will grow the amount of paid work we do with the eventual goal of being able to cover our costs should foundation funding start to dry up. Increasing the amount of earned revenue we bring in will also allow us to continue to grow and provide more services and better support to our members. We will charge for our services using a tiered pricing structure to differentiate between the rate we charge for-profit organizations vs. non-member non-profit organizations vs. member organizations. We will charge non-members and particularly for-profit organizations more to keep the cost down for our member organizations.

**Recouping Infrastructure Costs** - For the members using our hosted version of Largo, we will start to phase out our hosting subsidy and ask them to pay part of our hosting, infrastructure and maintenance costs. We will need to be careful how we price and communicate this because this has been a benefit that we have touted in the past and we won’t want to be seen as going back on that promise. We will also likely need to consider waiving these costs for members who can demonstrate financial hardship.

**Crowdfunding and/or Individual Contributions** - In 2015, we would also like to experiment with different funding mechanisms for new features, plugins or tools proposed either by us or by the community of sites using Largo. In some cases, there might be enough interest in these new features to try crowdfunding or some other experimental model to offset the cost of developing them. Also, while we don’t think it’s in our best interest to charge people outright who download and use our open source projects (Largo, particularly), we might also test different mechanisms to ask for “suggested donations” for people who find the value in the work we do.

**Technology Licensing** - It’s not likely that we will realize significant revenue in this way in 2015, but it deserves mention here particularly as we explore options for spinning off Impaq.Me.

<a id="proposal"></a>
## Our Plans for 2015

#### Where we're going to focus our energy in the coming year

### Largo

In early Q1, we will release version 0.4 of the Largo theme/framework - a major update that we worked on for much of 2014 with an eye towards solidifying the foundation Largo is built on so that subsequent updates will be more frequent and typically much smaller in scale. For the remainder of 2015, we will continue improving the core Largo framework, continue to migrate more members onto our hosted platform and increase the amount of paid work we take on to offset the cost of these improvements. Our roadmap for Largo in 2015 is as follows:

#### Q1 
- Update approximately one-third of existing member sites to version 0.4, in the process spend some time working with each member to talk about how their site has been performing and recommend areas for improvement.
- Catch and fix any bugs or stumbling blocks we encounter in version 0.4.
- Work on version 0.5, focusing on reducing reliance on third party libraries and improved performance.

#### Q2
- Update another one-third of existing member sites to what will at this point be version 0.5, as above spend time with each member helping them improve site performance, catch bugs, etc.
- Work on version 0.6, focusing on improvements to the admin interface, theme options and customizer experience.

#### Q3
- Update final one-third of existing member sites to 0.6, same as above.
By the end of Q3, all hosted member sites will be using version 0.6 and future updates will happen in tandem.
- Work on version 0.7, focusing on front-end user-experience and visual refresh.

#### Q4 
- Work on version 0.8, focusing on donation workflow and CRM (following research and testing outlined below in the “research” section).

Largo will continue to be our test-bed for other projects and overlap with items discussed below in the paid services, tools and training and research sections.

We will continue to fund our work on Largo using a mix of foundation grants and revenue from paid services. Wherever possible, we will take on paid work that aligns with our roadmap and allows us to move forward faster without distracting from our work on the core product. However, we will not allow funding to dictate our product and roadmap decisions. Instead, we will continue to be guided by members’ needs (both stated and what we believe they need to be successful). 

We believe that even with this narrow focus, there is considerable revenue to be realized from INN members who want to contract with us to do custom work beyond what we’re able to do for them as part of their regular INN membership and/or need help with ongoing support of their sites, as well as from non-members who want to use Largo but lack the expertise to get up and running. We already receive numerous unsolicited requests for these services and we believe they will only increase if we promote the services and/or have a salesperson focused on generating leads for new business.

To support this work we are requesting the creation of two additional headcount but these positions will largely be focused on training/support and delivery of work for paid clients. As a result the details for these positions are included in the Training and Consulting sections below.

In 2015, we will also begin to recoup some of our infrastructure costs by asking members to pay some part of hosting expenses for their sites (we have previously covered the entire cost of hosting for members’ primary websites). Details on how we’ll do this and the pricing model are still to be worked out.

### Tools

Re-focus energy previously devoted to editorial projects/apps for collaborative projects to instead develop, adapt or improve tools and frameworks to support editorial work at individual member organizations.

Particularly, we should identify tools that already exist that we can invest time and energy in making more generally applicable to our members. In many cases, some of our better-resourced members build a tool for their use that many other members might benefit from if they had the technical expertise to implement it. Sometimes these tools or applications may also just need a little polishing, work on documentation or to have a wrapper built to make them easier to setup and use.

We will spend some time in Q1/Q2 doing a survey of existing tools built by members (expanding on the work done last year by INN/IRE’s Director of Data Services in the [INN toolbox](http://bit.ly/1CYrhFb), identifying the strongest candidates for re-use by other members and assessing the amount of effort required to make them as easy as possible to use. During the remainder of the year we will do some of this work ourselves and/or facilitate code sprints or hackathons where we work in partnership with members to develop a set of tools to use in their editorial work. 

We will pay special attention to making sure these tools and applications work well with Largo and continue to use that platform as a test-bed for new products we develop. However, wherever possible (as with our Power Players app), we will ensure the use of the tools is not limited by choice of CMS.

For the tools that are more complex to implement, we will also use this a sales opportunity for our paid services, particularly where custom data services may be required to populate the tool (salary databases, etc.). There may also be some revenue potential here in the licensing of tools to non-member organizations, training and/or customization to suit a particular member’s specific needs. In addition we expect to receive incoming requests for services from INN’s strategic consulting practice and will coordinate with INN’s Director of Revenue to track leads and develop a reliable pipeline for new projects.

To service these needs, we plan to absorb the data services headcount previously housed at IRE beginning Q3.

Since this is a new offering, we are less confident of the size of this market opportunity and we have not included in the budget projection for 2015 much revenue in this area, but should be able to refine our assumptions and have a better sense of the revenue potential for 2016. We propose covering the cost of the data services headcount from general operating funds for the remainder of 2015 to allow us to develop the program and its continuance will be dependent on identifying sufficient revenue and new business to sustain it moving forward.

### Training and Documentation

We have, to date, under-invested in training and documentation, a fact that is clear from the volume of support requests we receive from members using Largo, many of which remain very basic questions. With a few exceptions, we also still don’t see members investing significantly in technology, a worrisome fact given that many are digital-first operations that depend on their web presence for their very existence.

In 2014, we attempted to close this gap somewhat using some part time and contract help to develop more comprehensive documentation for Largo and to help us develop a more structured support infrastructure to handle the volume of requests we receive and ensure they are addressed in a timely manner. However, we do not believe this is sufficient as the need is large, ongoing and not easily addressed in a piecemeal fashion.

In 2015, we propose adding one additional FT headcount (no later than than the end of Q2) to focus on support, training and documentation. We will continue to do our best in the meantime with contract and part-time help to fill this gap.

The focus of the new position will (tentatively) be as follows:

- Create (and keep updated) comprehensive documentation for Largo, including a better setup and onboarding guide, style guides, answers to frequently asked questions, how-to articles documenting common tasks, etc.
- Manage front-line support for Largo and other incoming requests, directing requests to other staff where applicable and in some cases helping to develop our sales pipeline for paid services.
- Help us to write comprehensive documentation for other tools and applications we build.
- Work with other staff and potentially outside contractors to develop guides and resources for [Newstraining.org](http://newstraining.org) on technology topics.
- Develop a curriculum for executive leadership to improve their technical knowledge, particular with an eye towards being able to more effectively manage their technical staff and resources, digital strategy, staffing, etc.
- Assist with the management of INN’s other training programs such as CJET and in-person training opportunities

The cost for this position would be covered through a combination of revenue for paid services (see the revenue projection in the detailed tech budget for 2015) and general operating (i.e. unrestricted foundation) funds unless we are able to secure grant funding for our training initiatives in particular. In subsequent years we believe the full cost of this position should be recoverable through paid services, support and training products (online or in-person courses, ebooks, resources, etc.).

### Community Building

In 2014, we started taking a more active role in fostering community among technologists at member organizations (details of some our efforts to date can be found here: [http://bit.ly/1rNz6Hg](http://bit.ly/1rNz6Hg)). In 2015, we will continue to experiment with different ways of connecting people at member organizations to help them learn from one another, develop support networks and increase the sharing of knowledge and best practices.

Specifically, we hope to convene at least one in-person gathering of 6-8 representatives from a number of organizations to work on shared documentation standards. We hope that having standards in place will make it easier to share projects in the future while establishing INN member organizations and our team as thought-leaders among the broader journalism and tech community. We have included some funding for this in our travel budget request for the year but hope to also secure funding/sponsorship for this event from a foundation or other partner(s).

Additionally, we will explore funding opportunities for other in-person gatherings (e.g. hackathons, training opportunities, informal gatherings at industry conferences, etc.) and continue to experiment with other ways of connecting teams and individuals virtually.

### INN Web Properties

We plan to launch the revamped primary INN website by the end of Q1 and continue to incrementally improve our existing web properties throughout the year.

Where time and funds allow, we also plan to improve our backend infrastructure for importing and managing member stories with the eye towards eventually having an API to allow for more flexible query and presentation of member content in different applications and contexts (syndication feeds, customizable widgets for member sites, content sharing among members and outside partners, a public-facing portal site for INN editorial content, potential mobile apps, etc.). We are also exploring a potential partnership with the Public Media Platform that may impact some of our plans in this area.

In Q1 we will also manage the re-branding work for INN and in the process create a set of visual standards and style guides. Given the tight timeframe for this project, we will engage an outside contractor to assist with this work but anticipate being able to cover any remaining effort required with our existing personnel.

### Research

With the growth of our Largo platform, we have the ability to test new approaches, run experiments and collect and analyze data on user behavior to allow us to develop and communicate best practices to our members.

In 2015, we will focus more attention in this area, particularly around revenue generation. A quick survey of member sites in late 2014 showed that donation workflow, in particular, is a huge stumbling block for many members and they are often not measuring results and evaluating their efforts in a way that allows them to make informed decisions.

Additionally, user testing for our Impaq.Me protototype revealed that many visitors to member websites do not even understand that the organizations are nonprofits that depend on individual donations to survive and thrive.

In Q2, we propose designing a number of tests to identify best practices around donation workflow using Largo sites as our test-bed (for consistency and ease of implementation). In Q3, we will run these tests with a set of member organizations, collect data and document our results and then use our findings in Q4 to build example workflows into Largo (in version 0.8). 

We do not anticipate any additional costs for this project other than potentially some modest expenses for in-person or remote user-testing. We will, however, seek funding from foundations for this work if a potential funder (or funders) can be identified and then use those funds to offset some portion of our regular personnel costs and/or engage a consultant to help with this research.

We hope that this will also allow us to develop a model that can be replicated for future research projects we might conduct in partnership with our members.

### Paid Services

In late 2014, we began to offer some paid services to members and non-members and realized some modest revenue. In 2015, we will considerably increase the amount of paid work we take on with the aim of reducing our reliance on foundation funding over time and allowing us to continue to grow and increase the value we’re able to offer to INN members.

We expect that the majority of our paid work in 2015 will come in design and development services around Largo for both members and non-members, but we anticipate some additional opportunity around training, ongoing support, story production, data services and news application development. Wherever possible, the work we take on should be aligned with our other strategic priorities so that it moves the sector forward without becoming a distraction from our mission. We will also prioritize projects brought to us by member organizations and offer them highly discounted rates on our services.

Our detailed budget includes a projection for 2015 and for 2016 which includes substantially discounted hourly rates for members ($85/hour) and non-member non-profit organizations ($125/hour) from our regular hourly rate for for-profit, non-member organizations ($175/hour). This projection assumes a roughly 50-50 split of paid work and internal projects. Assuming we can hit these targets, we expect that we could potentially cover our entire personnel cost by the end of 2016  possibly sooner.

These goals assume that we have some support in developing a sales pipeline from our strategic consulting practice and our support/training headcount, but it is likely that at some point (i.e. early 2016) we will also require a FT headcount just to focus on business development and client relations. This is not yet included in the budget but would need to be added should we reach a sufficient volume. Additionally, we will need to develop a website and marketing materials for our consulting services to aid in promoting the services we offer and make sure our sales process is streamlined and efficient.

To allow us to take on more work sooner, we are requesting the addition of one more FT headcount, a junior developer who will be primarily focused on delivering work on client projects. We expect to be able to fully offset this cost and realize a significant net profit on this position for the year.

Future addition of non-project funded headcount in the technology area would largely be contingent on increasing revenue we bring in from these paid services, so there is the potential that we may need to add additional resources before the end of 2015, but we don’t anticipate that happening at this time.

### Impaq.Me

Support the smooth hand-off of the project to a new partner and/or document and open source the existing prototype code by the end of Q2. 

This means that we will:

- Wind down any existing open contracts we have with vendors working on the project
- Improve documentation to make the app easier to setup and deploy
- Address any critical issues but pause development of new features until plans have been solidified

We have some funds remaining from an EEJF grant to complete any outstanding work; INN’s Director of Revenue has more details on the financials and prospective partners.
